Alternate bearing in Apple and its management

Table of contents

Alternate Bearing

Alternate Bearing means an alternating cropping pattern of the tree that is internally
regulated by the plant. This alternate bearing pattern is common in many of the
perennial trees and shrubs but is not universal. Apple is one of the heavily-studied
fruit crops with regard to alternate bearing because of its high economic importance.
Alternate bearing is an important economic problem for a number of fruit and nut
growers worldwide.

Management of alternate bearing in Apple

Site and cultivar selection

Based on the bearing tendency, apple varieties have been classified into three
groups (Jonkers, 1979).

1. Regular bearers: Early Worcester, Golden delicious, Golster, Jonagold, Rome Beauty

2. Moderate bearers: Delicious group, Golden spur, Granny Smith, Jonagold, McIntosh,
Northern Spy, Red Gold and Rhode Island Green

3. Distinctly alternate bearers: Baldwin, Benoni, Boskoop, Cox Orange Pippin

Selection of regular bearing varieties and planning of orchards in a site with optimal
climatic conditions with good soil and physical properties reduces the risk of
alternate bearing and other cropping irregularities. Spring flowering deciduous
orchards are preferably planted on sites with low risk of frost or freeze damage.

Cultural practices and pollination


Since the phenomenon of alternate bearing is natural and is internally regulated by
the plant, good crop management practices are essential to minimize its occurrence.

° In general, flower formation is promoted in perennial fruit trees under optimal growing
conditions. Optimal plant growth can be maintained by)practising annual pruning, regular
irrigation and maintenance of optimal nutriémblevels in soil and plant tissue along with
judicious use of pesticides.

° Honey bees are effective pollinators fof apple.Setting the beehives in apple orchards
during the blooming period enhances the pollination and fruit set.

Management of orchard with above cultural practices does not reduce the risk of
alternate bearing directly but the.risk of cropping irregularities will be managed up
to some extent

° Crop Load Management: This is the most important management practice for
minimizingalternate bearing. Crop load adjustment is very important for regulation of
yields in.the current season as well as for next season. Crop load management is done by
thinning,and,. pruning methods

= Chemical thinning: Some of the chemical thinners such as Lime sulphur, carbamates
(Garbaryl, Oxymyl @ 600ppm), NAA (2.5-20ppm), 6-BA (75-175ppm), Ethephon (150-
600ppm) are used for the chemical thinning process in apples.

@ Pruning: Pruning removes bearing surface (fruit buds) and stimulates vegetative
growth from remaining buds. This promotion of vegetative growth inhibits many of
the remaining buds from becoming floral.

@ Hand thinning: Hand thinning serves like a chemical thinning process. In this
method, excessive crop load is removed by hand thinning. Hand thinning is labour-
intensive, and it must be practised early in the growing season in order to have a
beneficial effect on the alternate bearing.

@ Return Bloom Sprays: Chemical thinning alone may not be adequate to promote
annual bearing in many of the commercially important apple cultivars that possess a
strong genetic tendency towards alternate bearing phenomena. In such cases, plant
growth regulators that directly stimulate flower formation should be used. NAA @ 3-
5 ppm or Ethephon @100-200 ppm may be used, starting from five weeks after
bloom to eight weeks after bloom to get quality yields.

Author: Aparna Veluru, ICAR-CPCRI, Kasaragod, Kerala

Source: https://data.vikaspedia.in/short/lc?k=8P1lekTdIPnoz7zFM4qyjg

,

NA


