oy

Ne

Apple production techniques

Table of contents

1. Climate

3. Soil

4, Propagation

5. Planting

8. Pruning

11, Plant Protection
12. Harvesting

13. Related resources

Apple (Malus pumila) is an important temperate fruit. Apples are mostly consumed
fresh but a small part of the production is processed in to juices, jellies, canned slices
and other items.

In India, Apple is primarily cultivated in Jammu & Kashmir; Himachal Pradesh; hills of
Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal. It is also cultivated to a small extent in Arunachal
Pradesh; Nagaland; Punjab and Sikkim.

Climate

The apple is a temperate fruit crop. However, in India the apple growing areas do not
fall in temperate zone but the prevailing temperate climate of the region is due to
the Himalayan ranges and high altitudes. The average summer temperature should
be around 21-24°C during active growth period. Apple succeeds best in regions
where the trees experience uninterrupted rest in winter and abundant sunshine for
good colour development. It can be grown at an altitude of 1500- 2700 m above the
sea level. Well-distributed rainfall of 1000-1250 mm throughout the growing season
is most favourable for optimum growth and fruitfulness of apple trees.


Varieties

1. Jammu and Kashmir : Golden Delicious (Late Season)pLal Ambri, Mollies Delicious,
Starkrimson, Red June, Irish Peach, Benoni‘and Tydeman’s Early

2. Himachal Pradesh : Golden Delicious (Late Season), Red Delicious (Mid season), McIntosh

3. Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh : McIntosh»Chaubattia Anupam

4. Tamil Nadu: Irish Peach and Zouches Pipin (Early); KKL 1, Carrington and Winterstein (Mid
-season); Rome Beauty and Paflin’s Beauty (late)

Soil

Apples grow best on awell-drained, loam soils having a depth of 45 cm and a pH
range of pH 5.5-6.5. The soil should be free from hard substrata and water-logged
conditions. Soils with, heavy clay or compact subsoil are to be avoided.

Propagation

Grafting : Apples are propagated by several methods viz.; whip, tongue, cleft and
roots grafting. Tongue and cleft grafting at 10-15 cm above the collar during
February-March gives the best results. Usually grafting is done at the end of winter.

Budding: Apples are mostly propagated by shield budding, which gives a high
percentage of success. In shield budding a single bud along with a shield piece of
stem is cut along with the scion and inserted beneath the rind of the rootstock
through a 'T' shaped incision during active growth period. Budding is done when the
buds are fully formed during summer. The optimum time of budding is September in
Kashmir Valley, Kumaon hills of Uttaranchal, high hills of Himachal Pradesh and June
in mid hills of Himachal Pradesh.

Rootstocks : Most of the apple plants are grafted or budded on seedling of wild crab
apple. The seedling rootstocks obtained from the seeds of diploid cultivars like
Golden Delicious, Yellow Newton, Wealthy, Macintosh and Granny Smith also can be
used. High density planting is done using dwarfing rootstocks (M9, M4, M7 and
M106).

Planting

The planting distance varies according to variety and the fertility level of the soil. The
main consideration in planting trees is planting of sufficient pollinators to ensure


effective pollination. Usually one pollinator tree is needed for two to three large trees
planted at 10 m distance or one row pollinator for two rows of main cultivar. For high
density planting the pollinator tree is planted after every sixth tree in a row.

The most widely used planting system is the square system. In this system, the
pollinators are planted after every sixth or ninth tree. The other popular system of
planting is the rectangular system. In hilly areas the apple orchards are established
by planting the trees on the contours so as to.prevent soil erosion and reduce run
off.

The average number of plants/in an area of one ha. can range between 200 to 1250.
Four different categories of planting density are followed viz. low (less than 250
plants/ha.), moderate (250-500 plants/ha.), high (500-1250 plants/ha.) and ultra high
density (more than 1250 plants /ha.). The combination of rootstock and scion variety
determines the plant spacing and planting density/unit area.

Time and method of planting

Planting is usually done in the month of January and February.

Pits measuring 60 cm are dug two weeks before planting. The pits are filled with
good loamy soil and organic matter. Planting is done in the centre of the pit by
scooping the soil and placing the soil ball keeping the roots intact. Loose soil is filled
up in the remaining area and lightly pressed to remove air gaps. The seedlings are
staked and watered immediately.

Irrigation

Apple trees are particularly sensitive to low soil moisture. Water stress during the
growing season reduces number and size of fruits, and increases June drop. Success
of apple largely depends on uniform distribution of rain during the year in case of
dry spells during the critical periods supplementary irrigation should be provided.
Water stress conditions results in poor fruit set, heavy fruit drop, low production and
poor quality. The most critical periods of water requirement are April- August and
peak water requirement is after fruit set. Normally the orchards are irrigated
immediately after manuring in the month of December-January. During the summer
periods, the crop is irrigated at an interval of 7-10 days. After the fruit setting stage
the crop is irrigated at weekly intervals. Application of water during the fortnight
preceding harvest markedly improves the fruit colour. Thereafter till the onset of
dormancy, irrigation is given at an interval of 3-4 weeks.


Pruning

Pruning is one of the most important practice which promotes plant vigour and
productivity. Pruning is done with a view to divert the sap flow towards the fruiting
branches and to force the plants to bear more fruits or to induce vigorous vegetative
growth. During pruning, weak-growing and diseased branches are removed from the
tree. Usually the trees are pruned every year in the month of December-January. The
systems of pruning adopted in apple cultivation are as follows.

° Established Spur System /Qbjective of this pruning is to develop permanent fruit spurs
for production of fruits. To ensure formation of spurs on the laterals the central leader is
cut back every year along with the strong erect laterals near the central leader. This leads to
wide angled vigorous laterals for formation of spurs.

° Regulated/System : Regulated pruning is practiced generally on apple cultivars growing
on semi#dwarfing and vigorous rootstocks. Before planting, the central leader of the tree is
cutback at 75>cm on which three well- placed primary branches are allowed to grow. In
bearing trees, the growth of leader and strong laterals are encouraged by pruning weak
and, crowded branches.

* Renewal System : In vigorous cultivars instead of developing permanent spurs, the
objective is to encourage continuous growth of new healthy shoots, spurs and branches
every year. A part of the tree is pruned every year to produce fruits in the following year on
the new shoot growth, while the unpruned parts produces fruit buds.

Thinning of fruit

Thinning is one of the major techniques employed to regulate fruit quality. In apples,
heavy bearing not only results in small-sized poor quality fruits but also sets in
alternate bearing cycle. Judicious thinning done at the proper stage of fruit
development can regulate cropping and improve fruit size and quality. Since manual
thinning is cumbersome and expensive, chemical thinning is employed.

Chemical thinners should not be applied in very hot and dry conditions as it
adversely affects the absorption. Spraying should be done thoroughly to cover the
entire canopy. Sometimes chemical thinning follow calcium deficiency therefore
adequate calcium nutrition should be supplemented after thinning.

It is desirable to retain one fruit for every 40 leaves. This spaces the fruit at about 15-
20 cm apart and there will be only one fruit per spur.

Manuring & Fertilization


Farmyard manure @ 10 kg./ year age of tree is applied along with other fertilizers.
The fertilizer dose depends upon the fertility of soil and amount of organic manure
applied to the crop. Generally, application of 350 g N, 175 g P20s5 and 350 g K20 per
plant per year in split doses is recommended for fully-grown bearing trees. On some
trees deficiency of zinc, boron, manganese-and calcium may be observed which is
corrected with the application of appropriate chemicals through foliage spray.

Plant Protection

Insect Pests : The insect pests mostly observed are San Jose Scale (Quadraspidiotus
perniciosus), white scale (Pseudoulacaspis sp.), wooly apple aphid (Eriosoma
lanigerum), blossom thrips (Thrips rhopalantennalis) etc. Planting of resistant
rootstocks, suitable intercultural operations and spraying with chloropyriphos,
fenitrothion, carbaryhetc. have been found to be effective in controlling the pests.

Diseases : The main diseases reported are collar rot (Phytophthora cactorum), apple
scab (Venturia inaequalis), sclerotius blight (Sc/erotium ro/fsi), crown gall
(Agrobacterium tumefaciens), cankers, die-back diseases etc. Plants resistant to the
diseases should be used for cultivation. The infected plant parts need to be
destroyed. Application of copper oxychloride, carbendazim, mancozeb and other
fungicides have been found to be effective in controlling the diseases.

Disorders : In apple, there are three distinct fruit drops.

° early drop resulting from unpollinated or unfertilized blossoms
° June drop (due to moisture stress and fruit competition) and
° Pre-harvest drop. Pre-harvest drop can be controlled by spraying NAA @ 10 ppm. (1 ml. of

Planofix dissolved in 4.5 |. of water) about a week before the expected drop.
Harvesting

Normally the apples are ready for harvest from September-October except in the
Nilgiris where the season is from April to July. The fruits mature within 130-150 days
after the full bloom stage depending upon the variety grown. The ripening of fruits is
associated with the change in colour, texture, quality and the development of the
characteristic flavour. The fruits at the time of harvest should be uniform, firm and
crisp. The colour of the skin at maturity ranges from yellow-red depending on the
variety. However, the optimum time of harvest depends on fruit quality and intended
period of storage. Due to the introduction of dwarf rootstock hand picking is
recommended as it reduces bruising due to fruit fall during mechanical harvesting.


Yield : The apple tree starts bearing from 4 year onwards. Depending on variety and
season, a well managed apple orchard yields on an average 10-20 kg/tree/year.

Source : NHB /@

Related resources

1. AESA based IPM package for Apple |E
3. Cultivation practices for Tamil Miu

Source: https://data.vikaspedia.in/short/le?k=W-f_BSeSPQYFPBBGFm1mBg

++

SZ


