Carnation

Table of contents XN

9.
Carnation is one of the most important cut flowers in the world. They are also called ‘clove gilly-
flowers’, divine flowers, clove pinks and gilly flowers. Botanical name of carnation is Dianthus
caryophyllus L.



Varieties

Carnation varieties can be demarcated into three main groups

depending upon flower size and their use.

° Standard carnation - These have single largeflower on an

individual stem used as cut flower.

° Spray carnation - Spray carnation is generally a bunch of flowers on

short branches of a single stalk. The flowers, afe Small and compact on each branch.

° Micro carnation - These have shorter stems and higher production than spray varieties.

These are used as ornamental pot plants besides its utility in flower arrangement.

It is advisable to take up cultivation ofyseveral colours in a single polyhouse of carnation. Market

demand exists for several colours.

New cultivars developed by various commercial companies of temperate countries are being

imported and are gfown in India. While selecting varieties for planting, besides color, care should

be taken about their adaptability to tropical condition and resistance to disease. Nearly all new

carnation varieties are protected by royalties; hence, growers particularly when producing for

export purposes Nave to be very careful about procurement of the material from right sources.

Listiof some of the commercial breeders

SLNo. Name of the variety

1. ITHRP-1
2. Gaudina

3. Cool

4. Aicardi

5 Ruphus

6. Gravello

7. Turbo

8. Viking

9. Indios

Colour

Red

Red

Red

Red

Red

Red

Red

White

White

Breeders

I.I.H.R., Bangalore

Hilverda B.V.

Kooij & Zonen B.V

Selecta B.V.

Selecta B.V.

Selecta B.V.

Santamaria, B.V

Hilverda,B.V

Kooij & Zonen B.V

Suppliers

I.I.H.R., Bangalore

KF Bio plants Pvt. Ltd.

Florance Flora

Nilgiris Flower Co.

Nilgiris Flower Co.

Nilgiris Flower Co.

SPA Flora Pvt. Ltd

KF Bio plants Pvt. Ltd

Florance Flora


11. White Wedding White Florance Flora

Kooij B.

KF Bio plants Pvt. Ltd.

Pink Shiva Santamaria, B.V SPA Flora Pvt. Ltd

17. Pink Selecta,B.V. Nilgiris Flower Co

Yellow Liberty Yellow Kooij & Zonen B.V Florance Flora

21. Diana Yellow Santamaria, B.V SPA Flora Pvt. Ltd

23. Mora Bicolour Santamaria, B.V SPA Flora Pvt. Ltd

25. Navidad Bicolour Selecta , B.V. Nilgiris Flower Co

Soil and climate

The ideal climate for carnation production should have a cool but stable temperature, low
humidity and long days with high light intensity. The standard carnation prefers a cooler climate
than the spray varieties. During the production of flowers, the plants must be protected from rain


and dew. Wet plants, especially wet buds and flowers are susceptible to fungal diseases.
Light

° Carnations are long day plants and require high light levels to produce high quality flowers.
° About 21500 Lux is considered to be the minimumatural light intensity required for
adequate photosynthesis of carnations.

Cultural operations

Polyhouse structures

° Carnation has to be grown under protected structures to maintain the quality and yield.
The greenhouse construction should be kept as simple as possible, but it should meet
some elementary demands inorder to maintain the right climate in the greenhouse.

° The plastic greenhouse should have 3 to 4 m? of airspace per m of floor surface. This is
equal to a gutter height of 2.5 to 3.5 meters as a minimum.

° When the gfeenhouseis too low, there will be high air humidity and high temperature
which is.not suitable for carnation.

° For good climate control/good ventilation, it is also important not to construct a too large
greenhouse under one roof (maximum 100x50m = 5000 m? per unit) and to make it
possible’'to roll up the sides.

° The roofing material could be Low Density Polyethylene (LDPE) of 200-micron thickness.
One kg of this material covers 5.37 sq.m. LDPE needs replacement once in three years.

Propagation

° Carnation (D.caryophyllus) for cutflower is multiplied through cuttings

° There are annual carnations that are multiplied by seeds. These annual carnations are
suitable as potted ornamental plants.

° D.chinensis and D. barbatus are multiplied through seeds.

Land preparation

° Deep ploughing to be followed before preparation of beds.

° A well-drained porous soil with adequate organic matter content is required for good
growth.

° As carnation has fibrous root system presence of sufficient amount of organic matter and
microorganism activity in the soil is required for supporting growth of good root system.

° The optimum soil pH should be around 6.5.

° Addition of calcium carbonate or dolomite limestone corrects the acid condition and also
supplies calcium and magnesium for plant nutrition.

° Addition of gypsum or use of acid forming fertilizers will also in turn reduce the soil pH if it
is on higher side.

Bed preparation

° For better working, a bed of one meter width and convenient length is to be prepared. A

oo. al rer 1 * 1 . at 1 1


working paln OT 5U Cm. Can be given Detween tne peas.

° Raised beds are ideal for cultivation.

° Bed can be ideally prepared by mixing of well rotten coir pith/paddy husk/saw dust.

° Sufficient amount of compost and sand should be added depending upon the clay content
of soil.

° Normally, a well-prepared bed should contain a mixtureof soil, farmyard manure, sand and
coir pith in a proportion of 4:2:1:1, respectivelys

Spacing and planting

° Planting can be done in different spacing.

° Normally, 30-45 plants per sq.mtais considered to be ideal.

° The different spacing followed basedon branching habit of the plant is 15x8cm, 15x10cm,
15x15cm and 15x20cm,

° In case information is lacking about the plant habit 15x20cm spacing can be conveniently
followed.

° Alternate planting in,adjacent rows is beneficial in terms of reduced incidence of disease.

° Shading should be given in the beginning of the crop for few days.

° Care should beytaken to maintain the humidity to prevent plants from drying.

Staking

®Carnation crop has the tendency to bend unless supported properly. Hence, the crop needs
support while growing.
° Good supporting material is metallic wire woven with nylon mesh.

i ar

i +

loll ie

Pinching

° Pinching refers to removal of growing tip of main shoot encouraging growth of side shoots.

° Depending upon the need of crop spread and market demand, single, one and half and
double pinches are given.

° When the plant attains six nodes, the first pinch is given. This is referred as ‘single pinch’.
This would give rise to six lateral

° In a ‘one and half pinch’, 2-3 of these lateral shoots are pinched again.

° For the ‘double pinch’, all the lateral shoots are pinched off.

° Ideal time for pinching is morning.



Disbudding

° In carnation, disbudding refers to removal of unwanted buds, so that the retained bud
receives maximum food for the full development.
° In standard carnations, side budg,are removed where as in spray carnations; the terminal

buds are removed.

Nutrient management

*Carnation is highly responsive for fertilizer application. It is very sensitive for boron and
calcium deficiency.

° Carnations require approximately equal parts of nitrogen and potash

° Supply of trace element boron and calcium in adequate quantity from the growth medium
continuously is essential for healthy flowers

° For the first three weeks after planting, plant does not require any fertilizer.

Recommendation

° Nitrogen, Phosphorous and Potash is 30:20:30 gm/sq.mts per year.
° A basal dose of 20:20:10gm/sq.mts is given at the time of planting
° Remaining fertilizer is applied in equally distributed dosage over

Water management

During the first three weeks, overhead sprinklers are required to prevent young plants from
drying out. Afterwards, drip irrigation can be used.

Disease management


Vascular wilt (Eoxysporum fisp. dianthi)

Vascular wilt is the most troublesome disease of carnation.
Symptoms

° Infected plants first develop a dull green color, eventuallywilt and turn straw-color.
Symptoms often appear on one section of thé plant.

° Plants may be attacked at any stage; young plants)can suddenly dry up or older plants
might develop a pale green color accompanied by wilting of lower leaves.

° A general wilting and death oftheentire plant frequently follow this.

° In the initial stage of infection, plants may wilt in the middle of the day when the
temperature is high and seem.to recover at night. Some plants may show no signs of
infection until they come into flower, when they suddenly collapse. When the stem is cut, a

brown discoloration or stfeaking may appear in the vascular tissues.

Bacterial wilt (Pseudomonas caryophylli)

Besides, wilting of plants due to fungus, bacterial wilt caused by Pseudomonas is also being

reported inarnation.
Symptoms

*Primary symptoms of infection include wilting of plants or shoots as well as splitting of the
stems and yellow streaks in the vascular system.

° Tissue just under the epidermis is sticky and cutting across the stem shows discoloration
and a bacterial ooze.

° Leaves turn gray-green then yellow and dry up. Rotting of roots and browning of vascular

tissue are the other commonly seen symptoms.
° Cracks develop in internode tissue. Slime oozes out from these cracks when humidity is

high.
° The disease appears to spread rapidly at high temperatures.

Leaf spots (A/ternaria dianthi and A.dianthicola)
Symptoms

Pale tan to brown spots with purple borders appears on leaves. In severe cases the leaves get

blighted due to merging of lesions.
Prevention/Control

° Efforts to maximize plant vigor by fertilizing and watering are helpful.

° However, watering should be done early in the day to give the foliage a chance to dry
before night.

° It is necessary to pick and remove symptomatic leaves as soon as they develop.

° The infection can be managed through application of Captafol (0.2%) or Chlorothalonil
(0.2%) or Iprodion formulations 0.2%.

a ee


FUUOLTOL

Several soil borne fungi attack the roots and collar portions of carnation especially under high
soil moisture conditions. The Phytophthora infections are caused by P. nicotianae var. nicotianae
and P. nicotianae var parasitica.

Symptoms: Leaves and flower buds are infected undenexcessively wet weather conditions.
Rotting of stem at soil level and ultimately the infected plants wilt. When roots are infected, the
leaves gradually get discolored and start drying from bottom upwards. Soft rotting of young
leaves and flower buds are the common symptoms.

Prevention/Control:

Since many of theses pathogens thrive well under high moisture conditions, moisture regulation
is an important step in the controlistrategy.

The fungicides useful aré Benomyl 0.2% or Iprodion formulations 0.2% against R. solaniand S.
rolfsii, whereas, metalaxyl + Mancozeb 0.2% and Fosetyl-Al 0.2% are effective in managing
infections by Pythium.and Phytophthora.

Flower rot (Botrytis cinerea)

®*Flowers turn papery brown and become covered with gray, fuzzy masses of the fungus
mycelium. Brown streaks develop on leaves.

* This disease is particularly troublesome during periods of extended cloudy, humid and wet
weather.

Prevention/Control

° Good sanitation practices including grooming the plants and removing spent or senescing
flowers can minimize the infection. It is also important to avoid wetting the flowers when
watering plants.

° Adequate spacing between the plants can promote good air circulation.

° Control can also be achieved with the use of fungicide sprays as soon as symptoms are
visible.

Disease chart
Disease Symptoms Pathogen/Cause Management

Apply Chlorothalonil

Small purplish spot form an ; (0.2%), Mancozeb (0.2%),
ernaria
Alternaria  onleaves. Their centers . Copper hydroxide (0.2%)
dianthicola or
Leaf Spot become brown and leaves oo ; or Mancozeb (0.2%) +
Alternaria dianthi ;
become yellow. Thiophanate Methyl (0.2%)

to protect healthy plants.

Leaves turn gray-green

then yellow and dry. Roots ’ :
— : Propagate in pasteurized


. rot, vascular tissue browns re j
Bacterial : Pseudomonas raised beds. Use clean,
Wik and cracks develop in

i

. caryophylli disinfested tools. Destroy
internode tissue. Slime

infected plants.
oozes from these cracks

when humidity is high

Pest management

Thrips - Thrips tabaci

Yellowish nymphs and brown coloured adults damage growing buds and flowers by sucking the
sap.

Symptoms

Damaged buds show brown streaks on light coloured flowers and white streaks on dark coloured
flowers. In severe cases Of attack flowers get distorted with burnt margins leading to
considerable quality reduction.

Two spotted spider mite - Tetranychus urticae

Itis'adevastating pest on carnation grown under protected conditions especially during
September-November and February-May.

Bud borer - Helicoverpa armigera

Eggs are laid singly on growing buds during September-October and damage continues up to
February - March.

Symptoms

° Young larvae bore into growing buds and feed on petals making them hallow. Larvae also
attack open flowers resulting in dropping of petals and significant yield loss.

Prevention/Control

° Collection and destruction of larvae reduces further infestation.

° Spray quinalphos 25 EC @ 2ml/I or methyl! parathion 50 EC @ 1 ml/I or endosulphan 35 EC
@ 2 ml/I at 15 days interval.

° Spray indoxacarb 14.5 SC @ 1 ml/I or thiodicarb 75 WP @ 1g/ if the incidence is severe.

° Spraying of of HaNPV (Helicoverpa armigera Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus) @ 250 LE/ha
followed by neem formulations1-2 ml/| or neem seed kernel extract 40g/I.

Nematodes

The root knot nematode cause small galls on the feeder roots affecting the uptake of nutrition

and water.

Symptoms: The foliage shows nutritional deficiency like symptoms accompanied by reduced size
of flowers


Management:

° Raise nursery in biopesticide enriched soil

° Apply farmyard manure enriched with bioagents Pochonia chlamydosporia and
Paecilomyces lilacinus before planting

° Apply Carbofuran 3G at 5 gm per sqm at transplanting and repeat after 45 days

° Tolerant lines like IIHRP-1 can be used for cultivationthat can withstand nematode

infestation

Harvest

° After planting normally carnation takes 110-120 days to come to peak flowering. A
commercial carnation plantis capable of producing 8 to 20 flowers per year.

° Depending upon market,demand harvesting can be delayed by covering the buds with bud
nets. When the buds start showing colour, bud nets can be put covering the entire flower
bud, this also enhances the bud size besides regulating the flower development.

Post harvest operations

° Immediately after harvest, cut ends of the carnation flower stems should be placed in a
bucket Containing clean water or floral preservative of biocide and acidifying agent.

°These flowers are pre cooled as early as possible at 20C for two to four hours

° Only healthy and uniform cut flowers are graded based on stem length and bud size.

° As per the market requirement, bunch of 10, 15 or 20 flowers are tied with rubber band
and the blooms covered with butter paper sleeves.

° Leaves on 1/3rd of the basal stem are removed and end of the stems trimmed.

° These bunched and trimmed flowers are immediately placed in a bucket of preservative
solution prepared in de-ionized water again.

° A good preservative solution for carnations should be acidic (pH 4.5) with 2-5% sucrose and

a biocide for pulsing.

Market and trade

The biggest consumer of carnation in terms of absolute quantity is the USA. But the most
consumed per capita is by England. Carnations are still popular in Eastern Europe where they

almost rival roses.

Source - E-Learning Module on Carnation Cultivation

Related Resources

1. Carnation Cultivation - @Tamil Nadu Agricultural University

2. Technical guide on Carnation - Tamil Nadu Agricultural University

3. Model bankable project on Carnation - NABARD

4. Carnation cultivation - !@ Himachal Pradesh Agriculture University, Palampur |


Source: https://data.vikaspedia.in/short/Ic?k=4IRxRaO2ribjQnmqwc8puQ



