Crop regulation in guava

Table of contents

1. Introduction
2. Fl i irupina’
3. Crop requlation in guava

Introduction

Guava (Psidium guajava)is an important commercial fruit crop grown in tropical and
sub-tropical regions of the world. Demand for this crop has is increased over the
years due to itshigh nutritive value. The crop can tolerate the high temperature and
drought condition up to some extent but it is susceptible to frost and waterlogging.
Heavy clay to light sandy soils having pH range 4.5-8.2 is suitable for cultivation. The
plant thrives well even in hilly areas up to 1,500 m above the mean sea level. Annual
rainfall of about 100 cm is enough during the rainy season (July-September).

Flowering and fruiting in guava

In guava, flowering occurs on current season's growth, even though the crop is
available around the year. For the purpose of commercial production, three distinct
flowering seasons were identified in northern and southern parts of India.

In north India, flowering occurs twice in a year i.e. during February and June. The
February or spring flowering is known as Ambe-bahar. Fruiting can be obtained from
this crop during June to September (i.e during a rainy season). The second or
monsoon flowering (flowering during June) is called as Mrig-bahar and its crop is
available during November to March.

In southern and western parts of India, third flowering occurs in October (Hasta-
bahar) and yields can be obtained from this crop during the spring season.
Crop regulation in guava

Crop regulation is practised in guava to encourage particular season crop in order to

net analityv fruit with hinh cammerrcial valiie For eavamnle in narthern India winter


Se ey eee ee rage ee re we py ee ee ay

crop is preferred over rainy season crop because fruits produced in the rainy season
are inferior in quality and fetches lower market price compared to the other.
Likewise, in the Deccan region, only two desirable crops in a year are preferred and
the third one is escaped.

The key principle of crop regulation is to force a tree for its rest and to produce
abundant blooms and fruits during particular seasons.

Crop during the unwanted season Is.escaped by practising deblossoming; this can be
achieved by induction of stress or using, thinning and pruning techniques.

1. Induction of water stressainduction of water stress by withholding irrigation after
harvesting of winter cropdn northern plains, results in the shedding of flowers and the
trees goes to rest/Juneiflowering is encouraged to get winter crop; for that, the basin of
the tree is dug up, manured and irrigated in June. After about 20-25 days of fertigation, the
tree put forth profuse flowering in July and fruiting is obtained in winter. Water stress can
also bedmduced.by practices like root exposure and root pruning.

2. Use of de-blossoming chemicals: some of the chemical compound or plant growth
regulators have been very useful in thinning a crop in guava. Post-bloom application of
NAA at 80- 100 ppm has been useful in reducing fruit set. This treatment can reduce more
than 80 % of rainy season crop and increase flowering of the following winter crop. NAD at
50 ppm and 2, 4-D at 30 ppm are also effective for de-blossoming of summer flowers

Author: Aparna Veluru, ICAR-CPCRI, Kasaragod

Source: https://data.vikaspedia.in/short/lc?k=IMW3nzES1RhR2HT32FpE4qg

if

NA


