Gerbera

Table of contents

2. Soil
3. Preparation of planting bed
4. Propagation
6, Planting
9. Pests and diseases
10. Harvesting

Gerbera is commonly Known as Transvaal daisy or Bar Berton daisy or African daisy.
It is an important commercial cut flower crop. Gerbera flowers have a wide range of
colors including yellow, orange, cream-white, pink, brick red, red, terracotta, and
various other intermediate colors. In double varieties, bicolor flowers are also
available. Gerbera flower stalks are long, thin, and leafy and have a long vase life.

The major producing states in India are Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tamilnadu, West
Bengal, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, and Gujarat.

Climate

Bright sunshine accelerates the growth and quality of the flowers, however, in
summer this flower needs diffused sunlight. Gerbera plants grown in locations with
insufficient light will not bloom well. The optimum day and night temperatures are

27°C and 14°C respectively. For flower initiation, the optimum temperature is 23°C

and for leaf unfolding it is 25 - 27°C.

Soil


There are two primary factors to be considered while selecting soil for Gerbera
Itivati

1. The soil pH must be between 5.5 to 6.5.

2. The soil salinity level does not exceed 1 ms/cm;

3. For better root growth and better penetration of roots, the soil should be highly porous
and well-drained.

Red lateritic soils are good for Gerbera cultivation as it is having all the essential
qualities that an ideal soil should have.

Preparation of planting bed

In general, Gerberas,are grown on raised beds to assist in easier movement and
better drainage. The dimensions of the bed should be as follows:

° Bed height: 7.5. feet (45 cm)
° Bed width: 2 feet (60 cm)
»Between the beds: 1 foot (30 cm)

The beds for planting should be highly porous, well-drained, and airy. Gravel/sand
can be added at the bottom for better drainage. Organic manure is recommended to
improve soil texture and to provide nutrition gradually. The soil should be loose all
the time. Organic manure and soil should be mixed thoroughly for optimum results.
The soil should not be very compact after watering. The upper layer of soil and FYM
should be properly mixed. While bed preparation, add Single Super Phosphate
(0:16:0) @ 2.5 kg per 100 sqft for better root establishment and Magnesium Sulphate
@ 0.5 kg per 100 saft to take care of deficiency of Mg. Neem cake (@ 1 kg / m) is also
added for the prevention of nematode infestation.

Soil sterilization

Soil sterilization is required before gerbera plantation to manage Phytophthora
infestation. There are three main soil sterilization methods available.

1. Steam: Not practical for Indian conditions.

2. Solar: in this method plastic sheet is covered on the soil for 6-8 weeks. The sunrise will heat
the soil, and this will kill most fungi.

3. Chemical: this is the most advanced and useful method. Hydrogen peroxide (H202) with
silver is used for the sterilization of soil. Use of formalin @ 7.5 - 10 lit/100sqm can also be
don

° Hydrogen peroxide (H202) with silver

Process:


1. wet the beds with irrigation water.

2. Mix water with hydrogen peroxide at a rate of 35 ml per/lite.

Apply this solution evenly on soil beds. Use one litemof mixed solution ( Hydrogen
peroxide (H202) with silver + water) For the one-meter area. After that in 4 to 6
hours the crop can be planted.

Benefits of Hydrogen Peroxide with Silver:

1. economical, reduce input cost

2. Very easy and safe thissmethod does not affect any dangerous effect on human health.

3. The plantation can be carried out after 4 to 6 hours of fumigation.

4. Eco-friendly anddoes not produce any phytotoxic effects on plants.

5. Almost any fungi, bacteria, and viral presence in the soil destroy the eggs of larva and
insects.

Propagation
Gerbera is propagated by seed, by cuttings of side shoots and suckers.

Seeds: Seed is set if cross-pollinated. Sowing of seeds may be done in almost any
season. Seeds germinate at 15 to 20°C within two weeks; otherwise, it may take up
to 30 days. Plants from seeds will bloom in the second year and produce good
flowers from the third year onwards.

Vegetative: Side shoots, with some amount of heel, are utilized. Divisions/ suckers
and cuttings are also used.

Micropropagation: The plant parts used as explants for micropropagation are Shoot
tips, Leaf mid-rib, Capitulum, Flower heads, Inflorescence, and Buds. Murashige and
Skoog (MS) media with modification is successfully used as culture media.

Varieties

Important cultivars of Gerbera: Pre Intenzz, Stanza, Winter Queen, Cacharelle, Jaffa,
Sangria, Diana, Thalia, Sonsara, Paganini, Anneke, Nette, Rosetta, Gloria, Ginna,
Ingrid, Pricilla, Alexias, Intense, Sunway, Zingaro, Balance, rosaline, dune and
Monique.

Planting


The plant should not be less than three months old. At the time of planting the tissue
culture, the plant should have at least 4 to 5 leaves. Gerberas are planted on raised
beds in two rows formations. The zigzag plantation system is mostly preferred. While
planting 65% portion of the root ball should be kept below ground and the rest of the
portion i.e. 35% should be kept above the ground for better air circulation in the root
zones.

Ideal planting density and spacing; 8-10 plants/sqm or 30 X 30 cm or 40 x 25 cm.

Fertilization

Irrigate and fertilize frequently in small quantities for optimum results. Always
analyze the soil once in 2-3 months to decide the specific nutrient schedule.

25 - 75 t/ha of well-decomposed organic manure is required. For the first three
months after planting, application of 20:20:20:N:P: K @ 1.5 g/l of water every two
days.during the vegetative stage encourages better foliage.

Once flowering commences, N:P: K 15:8:35 at the rate of 1.5 g/l water/day is to be
given. Micronutrients should be given weekly or fortnightly as per the deficiency
symptoms (preferably a chelated source). Boron deficiency causes the base of young
leaves to turn black-colored. Zinc deficiency symptoms can be identified with the C-
shaped leaf structure caused by chlorosis on one half of the leaf blade which ceases
to expand, while the other half of the leaf is normal.

Cultural practices

Weeding and raking of soil:

Weeds take the nutrients of the plants and affect their production. Hence, they
should be removed from the bed. Due to daily irrigation, the surface of the gerbera
bed becomes hard hence raking of soil is done with the help of a raker. It increases
soil aeration in the root zone of the plant. This operation should be done regularly,
maybe twice a month.

Disbudding:

Removal of inferior quality flowers at the initial stage after plantation is called
disbudding. The normal production of gerbera plants starts after 75 - 90 days from
the date of the plantation. Production of flowers starts 45 days after plantation but

imitial AeAdiictian ic Af infariarw ciialithe AaAnmean thaca Fflaiasaee cCAAiild Aa rarmeansnd fram


IPTG PI UU IS UT Peru YUCIILY, PICIILe LIT Se NMUWEIS SIV We ICHIiuveU TI

the base of the flower stalk. this helps in making the plant strong and healthy.
Removal of old leaves:

Sanitation helps in keeping the disease and pest infestation below the economic
threshold level. The old, dry, infected leaves should be removed from the plant and

removed from the production site.

Pests and diseases

Important Diseases: Root rot (Pythium irregular, Rhizoctonia solani); Foot rot (
Phytophthora crypto gear); Sclerotium rot (Sc/erotium ro/fsii; Blight ( Botrytis
cinerea); Powdery mildew Erysiphe cichoracearum, Oidium crysiphoides ); Leaf
spots ( Phyllosticta.gerberas, Alternaria spp.)

Viral disease(Cucumber mosaic virus and Tobacco rattle virus)

Insect-pests; White fly; Red Spider Mites; Nematodes; Aphids; Leaf miner;
Caterpillars

ee

(a) Alternaria leaf spots in gerbera (Dehradun) (b) Damage to gerbera flowers by Spodoptera /itura in Dehradun
(c) Root-knot nematode Meloidogyne incognita in gerbera in Jassowala

Pest management

1. Under protected cultivation conditions, the use of Insect-proof screens acts as physical
barriers to exclude insect pests.

2. Sanitation in terms of using pest-free planting materials, soil solarisation, and removal of
infected plant parts are key pest management practices.

3. Prudent Fertilization based on balanced use of nutrients to be followed. Excess Nitrogen
application to be avoided.

4. For management of root-knot nematode, application of carbofuran at 2 kg a.i./ha in
combination with neem seed powder @ 100 g/m? is effective.

5. Leaf spot disease of gerbera could be controlled by treating the plants with Benomyl (0.1%)
followed by Kavach (0.2%).

6. Spraying of copper oxychloride (0.3%), followed by Mancozeb (0.2%) was found superior in


reducing leaf spot/ blight disease in gerbera.

Harvesting

The first flowers may be harvested after 75 - 90 days after planting. Flowers of most
of the varieties (single types) are ready to be picked when 2 - 3 whorls of stamens
have entirely been developed. Some varieties are. picked a little riper, especially the
double types. the good flower has a stalk length of 45-55cm, and the diameter of the
flower is 10 - 12cm.

Morning or evening is the best time for gerbera flower harvesting. Skilled labor is
required for harvesting gerbera cut flowers. After harvesting the flowers should be
kept in a bucket containing clean water. Flowers are very delicate hence they should
be carefully handled otherwise can be damaged and their quality gets deteriorated.
For harvesting gerbera, no secateurs are required and are done by naked hands.

Sources



