~~

Maize

Table of contents

1. Introduction

2. Maize production technologies

3. Expert system for Maize

4. All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Maize

Introduction

In India , maize is the 3 most important food crops after rice and wheat. Among the
maize growing countries, India rank 4th in area and 7th in production, representing
around 4% of the world maize area and 2% of total production. It is cultivated in
83.33 lakh fa (2023-24) under a wide range of agro-ecological situations. As per First
Advance Estimates, the estimated production of maize during 2023-24 is 224.82 Lakh
Metric Tonnes.

Maize in India , contributes nearly 8 % in the national food basket and more than Rs.
100 billion to the agricultural GDP at current prices apart from the providing
employment to over 100 million man-days at the farm and downstream agricultural
and industrial sectors. In addition to staple food for human being and quality feed
for animals, maize serves as a basic raw material as an ingredient to thousands of
industrial products that includes starch, oil, protein, alcoholic beverages, food
sweeteners, pharmaceutical, cosmetic, film, textile, gum, package and paper
industries etc.

Maize production technologies

1. Hybrids of Maize |

2. Normal Maize Production Technology |@
3. Baby corn production |

4. State-wise recommendations for Maize
5. Information resources related to Maize |

Expert system for Maize


Ine Expert system Tor Iviaize Lrop emulates tne Interaction a user MIgnt nave witn a
human expert to solve a problem. It is meant to enhance the efficiency of farmers or
Agricultural Extension personnel for maize crop management and to increase the
crop yield. It determines the best strategy for irrigating, applying fertilizer and
insecticides. Presently, it has four subsystems: Variety Selection, Cultural Practices,
Disease Diagnosis, Insect Identification, and Post Harvest Technology. The Variety
Selection subsystem advises location specific varieties and Cultural Practices advises
on the aspects of irrigating, application of fertilizers and insecticides. Disease
Diagnosis and Insect Identification subsystems help the stake-holders to diagnoses
the disease and to identify insects affecting the maize crop and suggest preventive
and control measures. Post Harvest Technology subsystem deals with storage and
processing of maize for developing value added products.

To visit the expert system for maize, click here @.

All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Maize

All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Maize was established in 1957.
Development and release of widely adapted high yielding cultivars resistant to major
diseases and insect pests through extensive multidisciplinary and multi-location
testing was the objective of AICRP on Maize. It also aimed at shorten time of
adaptation, exchange of ideas on germplasm and avoiding duplication of breeding
efforts. Besides crop improvement, it is also involved in development of location-
specific/climate resilient technologies for improved production and protection
practices. These activities are currently carried out at 32 regular and 29 volunteer
centres located in different agro-ecological regions of the country to meet the
challenges of growing demand for maize at the national level.

To know more, click here !@.,

Source: Indian Institute of Maize Research |@

Source: https://data.vikaspedia.in/short/Ic?k=OY4r_oKpIG7tNnFhLOPtUw

+

IN


