+

Ne

Mesta

Table of contents

3. Land Preparation
4. Sowing
6. Water management
7. Intercultural operations
8. Plant Protection
i. Pests
9. Harvesting
10. Related resources

Two species of mesta viz., Hibiscus sabdariffa var. altissima and Hibiscus cannabinus
belonging to the family Malvaceae are cultivated for fibre purpose. Hibiscus
cannabinus is in the genus Hibiscus and is probably native to southern Asia, though
its exact natural origin is unknown. The sabdariffa (HS) mesta is commonly known as
Roselle. However, in different places it is also known as Java jute, Thailand jute, Pusa
he mp, Hemp, Chansi, Tengra pat, Lalambadi, Chukair, Yarragogu, Palechi, Puboibija
etc. The cannabinus (HS) mesta is commonly known as Mesta or it is also called
Kenaf. However, in general both the species are generally termed as Mesta in India. It
is also known as Bimli, Decan hemp, Gogu, Channa, Ambari, Gongku sa, Sunkura,
Sheria, etc.

Mesta is grown in 13 States namely Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Odisha, Tamil
Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal.

State-wise recommended varieties
° Andhra Pradesh - AMV 5 (Durga), GR 27 (Madhuri) and MT150 (Nirmal), JRM5 (Shrestha)

° Bihar - GR 27 (Madhuri) and MT 150 (Nirmal), JRM5 (Shrestha)
° Meghalaya, Tripura - GR 27 (Madhuri) and MT 150 (Nirmal), JRM5 (Shrestha)


° Odisha- AMV 5 (Durga), GR 27 (Madhuri) and MT150 (Nirmal), JRM5 (Shrestha)

Climate

Warm and humid climate are best suited to both the species of mesta i.e. canabinus
and sabdariffa. Canabinus mesta is of short duration and suitable for higher rainfall
areas and has got less drought tolerance capacity. Sabdariffa mesta is of longer
duration and got better drought tolerance capacity. The crop can grow in
temperature range of 20 degree centignade to 40 degree centigrade but optimum
temperature for its growth is 30 degree,centigrade to 34 degree centigrade. The crop
ca n grow in high rainfall areas provided good drainage is there. On the other hand it
can grow in low rainfall areas to the tune of even 500 mm rainfall per annum.
However, a rain fall of about 425 to 1 50 mm per month distributed well is required
during the growth period. Alternate rain and sunshine is good for better growth.

Land Preparation

Mesta beingya rainfed crop, land preparation is usually done with the receipt of pre
monsoon showers. However, in Andhra Pradesh, for raising rabi mesta, the land
preparation is done early in February for sowing the crop with the help of subsoil
moisture. Land is to be ploughed with pre-monsoon shower followed by laddering to
obtain fine tilth.

Sowing

The optimum plant population for mesta is a bout 4 to 5 lakh per hectare. The
recommended row to row spacing is 25 to 30 cm and plant to plant spacing is 7 to 10
cm. if the crop is sown by broadcasting method then the plant to plant spacing is
maintained at about 12 - 15 cm by thinning. For maintaining optimum plant
population the seed rate for the two species varies. However, the recommended seed
rate is higher than the actual requirement for maintaining the desired plant
population. This is done because of getting uniform plant population. After
emergence, the excess plants are thinned out to get desired spacing. The seed rate
of the two species in two method of sowings are as under:

1. H. cannabinus
@ Broadcasting - 15- 17 kg/ha
@ Line sowing -13- 15 kg/ha
2. H. sabdariffa
@ Broadcasting - 13- 15 kg/ha


@ Line sowing -11- 13 kg/ha

Before sowing of seeds, it is always preferable to treat the seeds particularly to avoid
the infection of the diseases to the crop . Seed treatment can be done with
organomercural fungicide like Agrosan GN of Ceresan at the rate of 5 gm per kg of
seed or Dithane M45 at the rate of 4 gm penkg of seedor Bavistin at the rate of 2 gm
per kg of seed.

Manures and Fertilizers

Fertilizer application: FYM @ 5-6 t/hais to be applied during land preparation. In
medium fertile soil, the recommended dose of fertilizer is 40:20:20 (N: P20 5: K 30,
kg/ha). P and K will beapplied as basal while N is to splitted as - 1/3 rd at sowing, 1/3
rd at time of first weeding (21 DAS) and 1/3 rd at second weeding (35 DAS). For drier
tracts, if soil moisture is not favourable, foliar application of urea (1.0%) may be done.

In acid soils andyregions with high rainfall, calcium and magnesium deficiency is
common. Liming of soil @ 25 t/ha, once in 4 y ears or Dolomite application (40 kg/ha)
is found promising as it supplies both calcium and magnesium.

Water management

In India, mesta is mainly raised as a rainfed crop . Since the pattern of rainfall during
the sowing and growth period is highly erratic, desired yield is not obtained in mesta
crop. For obtaining good yield, along with other inputs, the water requirement of the
crop is to be fulfilled. The water requirement of mesta is about 50 cm. if the rainfall is
uniformly is highly uncertain, in that case it is desirable to give one or two irrigation
to mesta crop at an interval of 15 to 20 days.

Intercultural operations

In general, two weedings - 1st at 21 DAS and 2nd at 35 DAS is sufficient. In case of
heavy weed infestation, three weeding - 1st at 14-21 DAS, 2nd at 28 - 35 DAS and
3rd at 42 - 49 DAS is recommended. Light thinning during 1st weeding and final
thinning during 2nd weeding is recommended.

Plant Protection

Dacte


rFeot

Jassids

Both adults and nymphs injure the plant by sucking plant sap and injecting toxin
Saliva into the leaf tissue. The edges of the affected leaves first turn pale green, later
becomes yellowish green and finally red. In case of severe attack, the leaves curves
downward and become crinkled. The plant growth becomes stunted and yield
declines.

Management : Early sowing prevents the attack of Jassid. Jassid tolerant varieties
like AMV3 and AMV4 is to be grown, Light trap may be used to control this pest. Seed
treatment with carbofuran 3G @ 30 g/kg of seed prevent the attack upto 30 days age.
On the standing crop if there is attack of this pest, Methyl Demiton (Metasystox 25
EC) 0.05% @ one litre (in 500 litre of water) per hectare or Dimethoate 0.05% @ 800
ml (in 500 litre of water) per hectare may be applied. The pest may also be controlled
by biologicalmethod. The spider predator viz., Chiracanthium mea/nostoma or
Thornisus katrajghatus or Oxyopes javanus may be conserved in the field and this
will Suppress the attack of Jassids.

Mealy bug

Mealy bug is a predominant pest of Sabdariffa mesta. Its attack is mostly confined to
junctions of the plant. Both nymphs and adult female cause injury to the plant by
thrusting their long filamentous styletes. The attacked region sweels and internodes
become shorter and deep green colour is developed. The vertical growth of
internode is arrested. Due to severe attack the growing tip is damaged and
secondary branches develop. These secondary branches again get infested and
result in “bunchy tops”, the characteristic symptom of this p est. At the time of
extraction, the fibre snaps at the affected region resulted loss of fibre and ultimately
reduction in yield.

Management: Crop rotation may be adopt ed to prevent attack in future. The
bunchy top portion may be cut to prevent the spread of the pest. Chemically, the
pest may be controlled by spray of Dimethoate (Rogor) 30 E C @ 0.05% (750 ml in 500
litre of water per hectare) or Metasystox 25 EC @ 0.05% (1 litre in 500 litre of water
per hectare). Biological control measure may also be adapted. Four natural;
predators viz., Hyperaspis maindroni, Spalgisepius, Chrysopa seclestes and Eublema
silieula were identified to feed both eggs and nymphs of mealybug.

Semilooper

Both the species of mesta are equally susceptible to semilooper. The pest usually


- Pa

appears in the months of September /October. The pest starts attacking the plant
from apical leaves and gradually extends downwards. They start feeding from leaf
margin and finally the whole leaf will be eaten away leaving only the midribs. In
severe attack the growing points are also eaten away and thus pants become
stunted and branching is induced resulting in adverse effect on yield. The pest is
nocturnal in habit and remain hidden during day time.

Management : Mechanically, the pest may be controlled by the collection and
destruction of the caterpillars. Spraying Fenvalerate 20 per cent EC @1 ml/lit or
Cypermethrin 25 per cent EC @11.2 mi/lit, control the pest.

Spiral borer

Spiral bores is found to attack mainly cannabinus mesta. It is most prevalent in high
rainfall areas. Thelarvayafter hatching burrows its way beneath the cambium layer
and starts feeding upon the woody tissues, making spiral around the stem beneath
the bark and inner fibre layers are damaged. Infected regions swells up to form an
elongated gall: Gall becomes week and breaks due to impact of strong wind.

Management: Seeds should be treated with Malathion 5% or Sevin 5% @ 10 gm/kg
of seed. Spraying Fenvalerate 2 0 per cent EC @1 ml/I it or Cypermethrin 25 per cent
EC @ 11.2 ml/lit, control the pest.

Diseases

Foot and stem rot

This is primarily a soil born disease and mainly occurs under cloudy, high humid an d
low temperature condition. Usually, it is observed after heavy rains. Water logging
conditions favours the spread of the disease. It is most prevalent in sabdariffa mesta:
Plants of all ages is affected and affected both yield and quality of fibre. It is mostly
found in September/ October. Initially, withering of the terminal portion of the plant
and pale colour of leaf is observed. After about 10 to 15 days of attack blackening of
tissues at the base of the plant (foot region) is observed which gradually spread upto
60 cm height. The whole plant gradually wilt. During fibre extraction, the fibre breaks
at the point of infection and fibre is discoloured.

Management: Water should not be allowed to stand in the field. Crop rotation
should be followed. Roughing of the affected plants may be done. Resistant variety
like AMV3 may be grown. Seed treatment should be done with Dithane M45 @ 3gm/k
g of seed. Soil drenching may be done around the diseased plant with Dithane M45


@ 2 gm/litre of water.
Leaf rot

The disease occurs mainly in the month of August / September. Small concentrated
ring like structures appear on the leaves and gradually.increases in size and and
gradually damage the leaf.

Management: Dithane M45 @ 0.2 p er cent (2 gm/litre of water) may be applied in
severe attack.

Tip rot

It is usually found in sabdariffamesta. The disease appears in young plants aged
about 30 to 40 days. The young plants droop and gradually die. The stem turns
white.

Management: Application of Blitox 0. 3% (3 gm/litre of water) or Dithane M45 @ 0.2
per cent (2 gm/litre of water) will reduce the incidence of the disease.

Collar rot

Both the species of mesta is attacked by this disease. When the plant is attacked by
this disease, deep seated lesions are observed on the stem at the ground level.
Virtually, no control measure of this disease has so far been developed. However,
water logging in the field should be avoided to prevent the attack of this disease.

Root rot

Sabdariffa mesta is usually attacked by this disease. Seedings and young plants are
attacked by this disease. The roots are decayed, the plants wilted and subsequently
die. Water logging should be avoided. Before sowing, soil should be treated with
Blitox of Copper oxycloride @ 205 kg/ha. On standing crop, Copper oxycloride at 0.05
to 0.7 5 per cent may be sprayed on soil to control the attack.

Anthracnose

Mainly cannabinus mesta is susceptible to this disease. Initially terminal bud is
attacked. Stipules and young leaves develop necrotic spots and withers. Stem
infection appears as black lesions which later form cavities. Gradually defoliation
occurs. Resistant variety like AMV 3 is to be grown. Seed treatment should be done
with thiram @ 1.25 mg/kg of seed. Prophylactic spray with Copper oxycloride at 0.075
per cent may also be done.


Seeding rou

Cannabinus mesta is mainly susceptible to this disease. This disease is observed
mainly under warm and high humid condition. The seedling initially develops black
lesions on the cotyledons which rot and wither. Lesions appear along the apex and
margin of the leaves and the whole leaf is infected on the growing plants. The
pathogen travels through petiole and reaches the node and stem rot starts. Soil
acidity should be corrected. Proper drainage should be maintained and potassium
fertilizer should be applied, Copper oxycloride at 0.075 to 0.10 per cent may be
sprayed.

Harvesting

The best time of harves ting is small pod stage for cannabinus mesta which usually
occurs in October while for sabdariffa mesta it is at 50 per cent flowering which
occurs in November If the plants are harvested earlier to this, fibre yield will below
and many of the fibre are immature and soft and may loss at the time of extraction if
the harvesting is delayed or it is done at the maturity of the crop, the yield may be
more but produces poor quality fibre which is brittle and less flexible as the cellulose
reserves decline due to its utilization by developing fruits and seeds. The normal
duration of harvesting of mesta is about 140 to 145 days.

Fibre Yield: 22-25 q/ha.

Source : Directorate of Jute development

Related resources

1. Crop calendar

Source: https://data.vikaspedia.in/short/Ic?k=116nS9QsdDH94RnC_Uf4cA


