Table of contents

1. Rice

2. Rice Knowledge Management Portal (RKMP)

4] Oi uct wie | it
5. Rice Production related resources

Rice

Rice is the major cereal crop grown in about 44.6 million hectares in the country.
India represents all kinds of diversity under which rice is grown across the globe. No
other crop isvas versatile as rice. Rice crop is interwoven in the cultural, social and
economic life of millions of Indian and it holds the key for food and nutritional
security of the country. Rice production scenario in the country during the past
decade presents a gloomy picture of compound growth rate of just 1.7 per cent. To
meet a production target of 125 million tonnes by 2025, all inclusive of food
requirement, seed for cultivation, storage in buffer stock and a share for exports,
productivity in irrigated area needs to be enhanced by 1.5 tons/ha and in rain-fed
lowlands by about 1 ton/ha.

Rice Knowledge Management Portal (RKMP)

Considering the need for empowering rice farmers for increased productivity and
production, providing continuous knowledge support to the extension workers in the
rice growing states, Directorate of Rice Research (DRR) with the support of ICAR
developed the ‘Rice Knowledge Management Portal (RKMP)’. This portal has been
launched in 2010, with an aim of strengthening the research, extension, farmers and
private subsystems, partnerships and networks, for the better flow of rice knowledge
and information contributing to the over all rice development in the country.

Source: ICAR - Indian Institute of Rice Research @


Agro advisory for Rice

Bi-weekly agro advisory for Rice farmers (Aavailable in English and Odia) and
released by the National Rice Research Institute (NRRI), Cuttack. To view the advisory,
click here a.

Improved rice production practices under climate change conditions

Rice Production related resources

1Ti Ricet NESM
2. Rodent Management in Paddy (28.2KB) |

3»Hybrid Rice Seed Production-Guidelines (752KB) @
4. Management of Rice Stem Borer (15.4KB) |B

5. Manual on Organic Production of Kalanamak Rice

Source: https://data.vikaspedia.in/short/Ic?k=4INwy1UwmEjOIdPSzM42ww

+

SZ


